---
layout: post
title: "Catalyze"
description: "My experience working at Catalyze"
category: Experience
tags: [Development, Infastructure, Backend, Internship, AngularJS, Python, Catalyze]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

	cat·a·lyze
	(ˈkadlˌīz)
		verb
		to cause (an action or process) to begin.

So there I was, sitting across the table from my soon to be boss sweating anxiously as I wondered if I was going to be forced to summon any of the material I had learned in my data structures or intro to programming courses that I had taken a year earlier.  To my pleasant surprise this did not turn out to be the case.   I was asked about the work I had done at my previous employer and the independent research course I had taken.  After that I received a tour of the modest downtown Madison office. I recall staring at the Zuckerberg-esque formulas and diagrams written in dry erase marker on the windows (like the ones in the movie the social network).  I was somewhat intimidated by these doodles that were riddled with acronyms, but I did my best to mask the fact that I was completely clueless to their meaning.  

The next few weeks I would learn the ins and outs of [HIPAA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Health_Insurance_Portability_and_Accountability_Act) compliance and what it had to do with software development.  I became more familiar with the software Catalyze had developed and started writing automated tests for various components.  As I dove deeper and deeper into how Catalyze's Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Backend as a Service (BaaS) products worked I got the sense that this wasn't your average startup trying to get more customers to use its applications, but rather a determined group of individuals set out to disrupt the way health care infrastructure is developed and used.  Now, I know what you're thinking, claiming to disrupt an outdated system of doing things is the most cliche startup statement imaginable, but hear me out.  I was astonished to find out that Catalyze, with its tight nit group of then about 12 engineers, had created a platform that could automatically provision infrastructure that large health organizations spend millions of dollars to develop themselves for a fraction of the cost in a fraction of the time. All with the highest compliance certification available and state of the art security features.  I remember thinking that I was no where near qualified to be able to contribute anything even remotely significant to this state of the art software.  

Much like the way Catalyze's platform allows healthcare organizations to begin building revolutionary and sometimes life saving products and applications easily, being hired at Catalyze allowed me to begin my quest to grain a greater understanding for how sophisticated software applications work end to end.  After some time of being exposed and often overwhelmed by the software at Catalyze it all started coming together. I gained a greater understanding of how the pieces of infrastructure worked together and it soon became clear to me that these pieces often talked to each other via a RESTful API.  When I first started working at Catalyze a RESTful API was a pretty new concept to me, and it soon became apparent that this was the way in which almost every website, mobile app or application transferred information over the internet.   I hadn't learned about RESTful APIs in any of my classes which is upsetting because they are so paramount to the transfer of information over the internet.  I was soon tasked with building one of these RESTful APIs for the use of monitoring and controlling pieces of Catalyze's infrastructure.  Data would be displayed on a user friendly webpage called the platform internal dashboard (PID) that would allow the system admin guys to see how pieces of infrastructure were performing and make adjustments to them at a high level.  

I began development on the backend RESTful API for PID using [falcon](http://falconframework.org/) framework written in Python.  The front end web page would be developed using [AngularJS](https://angularjs.org/). I soon had the site working, and before long I became the go to guy for all things PID.  As the company and infrastructure scaled, PID had to become more robust and faster so caching using [redis](http://redis.io/) was implemented.  One of the biggest challenges I faced when developing PID was to understand how various pieces of infrastructure worked and creating a way to centralize information about that infrastructure.  Additionally, I had to determine what information was useful and how to display this in the most efficient way possible. It became clear that the best way to face these challenges was to gather as much information as I could about the end users of PID.  I interviewed all of the the system administrators (some several times) and identified their regular tasks and how theses tasks could be automated or built into a tool.  As I repeated this process of interviewing and building tools and automation, I became better and better at transcending every level of abstraction through the development process.  I was playing the role of a software architect where I was making more high level implementation decisions that would be compiled into a set of requirements and tasked out for implementation.  

One of these decisions occurred when I was tasked with expanding the way  that Catalyze collects and displays infrastructure performance metrics.  Catalyze's infrastructure runs on docker and using the docker daemon you are able to extract useful performance metrics such as cpu and memory usage. However, for Catalyze, it is necessary to attach proprietary metadata to these performance metrics such as identifiers in order to determine what container, service or process belongs to what customers.  In addition to this, the system administrators wanted down to the minute granularity and data to persist for 2 years without using an overwhelming amount of space to store this data. I decided to use influx db to store this data and restructure the way data was collected on every host to minimize overhead and make deployment of the metrics collector easier.  Currently this project is still a work in progress but once it is complete customers will be able to more effectively view performance metrics about their environments.

Working at an infrastructure company like Catalyze provides its own unique set of difficult problems.  Efficient scaling and performance optimizations are critical to the success of an infrastructure company, and it takes a talented and adaptable group of engineers to face the onslaught of challenges that arise from maintaining and building HIPAA compliant infrastructure.  After personally facing some these challenges I have acquired a thirst to thoroughly understand the entire lifecycle of building and maintaining complex and revolutionary applications. My quest to become a skilled software architect has been Catalyzed.
